README.md, before:

# Icinga Notifications

> **Warning**
> This is an early preview version for you to try, but do not use this in production. There may still be severe bugs
> and incompatible changes may happen without any notice. At the moment, we don't yet provide any support for this.

Icinga Notifications is a set of components that processes received events from various sources, manages incidents and
forwards notifications to predefined contacts, consisting of:

* The Icinga Notifications daemon (this repository), which receives events and sends notifications
* An [Icinga Web module](https://github.com/Icinga/icinga-notifications-web) that provides graphical configuration and further processing of the data collected by the daemon
* And Icinga 2 and other custom sources that propagate state updates and acknowledgement events to the daemon

## Installation

To install Icinga Notifications and get started, you first need to clone this repository.
```bash
git clone https://github.com/Icinga/icinga-notifications.git
```

Next, you need to provide a `config.yml` file, similar to the [example config](config.example.yml), for the daemon.
It is required that you have created a new database and imported the [schema](schema/pgsql/schema.sql) file beforehand.
> **Note**
> At the moment **PostgreSQL** is the only database backend we support.

Additionally, it also requires you to manually insert items into the **source** table before starting the daemon.
```sql
INSERT INTO source (id, type, name, listener_password_hash)
VALUES (1, 'icinga2', 'Icinga 2', '$2y$10$QU8bJ7cpW1SmoVQ/RndX5O2J5L1PJF7NZ2dlIW7Rv3zUEcbUFg3z2');
```
The `listener_password_hash` is a [PHP `password_hash`](https://www.php.net/manual/en/function.password-hash.php) with the `PASSWORD_DEFAULT` algorithm, currently bcrypt.
In the example above, this is "correct horse battery staple".
This mimics Icinga Web 2's behavior, as stated in [its documentation](https://icinga.com/docs/icinga-web/latest/doc/20-Advanced-Topics/#manual-user-creation-for-database-authentication-backend).

Then, you can launch the daemon with the following command.
```go
go run ./cmd/icinga-notifications-daemon --config config.yml
```

Last but not least, in order for the daemon to receive events from Icinga 2, you need to copy the [Icinga 2 config](icinga2.conf)
to `/etc/icinga2/features-enabled` on your master node(s) and restart the Icinga 2 service. At the top of this file,
you will find multiple configurations options that can be set in `/etc/icinga2/constants.conf`. There are also Icinga2
`EventCommand` definitions in this file that will automatically match all your **checkables**, which may not work
properly if the configuration already uses event commands for something else.

## License

Icinga Notifications is licensed under the terms of the [GNU General Public License Version 2](LICENSE).

Commit message:

Load ConfigFile from Environment Variables
Next to populating ConfigFile through default values and by a YAML
configuration, environment variable support was added.

The code works by reflecting on the existing nested ConfigFile struct.
The environment variable key is an underscore separated string of
uppercase struct fields.

README.md, after:

# Icinga Notifications

> **Warning**
> This is an early preview version for you to try, but do not use this in production. There may still be severe bugs
> and incompatible changes may happen without any notice. At the moment, we don't yet provide any support for this.

Icinga Notifications is a set of components that processes received events from various sources, manages incidents and
forwards notifications to predefined contacts, consisting of:

* The Icinga Notifications daemon (this repository), which receives events and sends notifications
* An [Icinga Web module](https://github.com/Icinga/icinga-notifications-web) that provides graphical configuration and further processing of the data collected by the daemon
* And Icinga 2 and other custom sources that propagate state updates and acknowledgement events to the daemon

## Installation

To install Icinga Notifications and get started, you first need to clone this repository.
```bash
git clone https://github.com/Icinga/icinga-notifications.git
```

Next, you need to provide a `config.yml` file, similar to the [example config](config.example.yml), for the daemon.
It is also possible to set environment variables by name instead of or in addition to the configuration file.
The environment variable key is an underscore separated string of uppercase struct fields. For example
* `ICINGA_NOTIFICATIONS_LISTEN` sets `ConfigFile.Listen` and
* `ICINGA_NOTIFICATIONS_DATABASE_HOST` sets `ConfigFile.Database.Host`.

It is required that you have created a new database and imported the [schema](schema/pgsql/schema.sql) file beforehand.
> **Note**
> At the moment **PostgreSQL** is the only database backend we support.

Additionally, it also requires you to manually insert items into the **source** table before starting the daemon.
```sql
INSERT INTO source (id, type, name, listener_password_hash)
VALUES (1, 'icinga2', 'Icinga 2', '$2y$10$QU8bJ7cpW1SmoVQ/RndX5O2J5L1PJF7NZ2dlIW7Rv3zUEcbUFg3z2');
```
The `listener_password_hash` is a [PHP `password_hash`](https://www.php.net/manual/en/function.password-hash.php) with the `PASSWORD_DEFAULT` algorithm, currently bcrypt.
In the example above, this is "correct horse battery staple".
This mimics Icinga Web 2's behavior, as stated in [its documentation](https://icinga.com/docs/icinga-web/latest/doc/20-Advanced-Topics/#manual-user-creation-for-database-authentication-backend).

Then, you can launch the daemon with the following command.
```go
go run ./cmd/icinga-notifications-daemon --config config.yml
```

Last but not least, in order for the daemon to receive events from Icinga 2, you need to copy the [Icinga 2 config](icinga2.conf)
to `/etc/icinga2/features-enabled` on your master node(s) and restart the Icinga 2 service. At the top of this file,
you will find multiple configurations options that can be set in `/etc/icinga2/constants.conf`. There are also Icinga2
`EventCommand` definitions in this file that will automatically match all your **checkables**, which may not work
properly if the configuration already uses event commands for something else.

## License

Icinga Notifications is licensed under the terms of the [GNU General Public License Version 2](LICENSE).
